Since the early 2000s several reports and surveys have called for a
national coordination of terminology work, such as e.g.
:AppLinkContent{to="https://www.sprakradet.no/upload/9832/norsk_i_hundre.pdf"
desc="Norsk i hundre!"} (2005) and :AppLinkContent{to="https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumenter/stmeld-nr-35-2007-2008-/id519923/"
desc="Report to the Storting (white paper) no. 35 (2007-2008). Mål og
meining. Ein heilskapleg norsk språkpolitikk"}. An underlying
motivation has been the ever-increasing use of English in higher
education and the fear of domain loss for the Norwegian language.
Higher education has been pointed out as the central sector for a
national effort to maintain and further develop Norwegian for specific
purposes (LSPs), including Norwegian terminology.

In the spring 2020, a proposal for a language act was presented by the
Norwegian government in the Proposition to the Storting (draft
resolution) Prop. 108 L (2019–2020) Lov om språk [language act] in
which they pointed to Termportalen at the Norwegian Language
Collections (Språksamlingane), University of Bergen (UiB), as a
possible national coordinator of terminology.

::BlockQuote
Termportalen, located at the Norwegian Language Collections at the
University of Bergen, which today exists in the form of a fully
functional prototype, may be developed to become a freely available
resource for Norwegian terminology within several domains, in which it
will be possible to search across termbases and domains. The Norwegian
Language Collections wants to establish a terminology unit that may
operate the portal in order to further develop its content to include
terminology from central domains, both belonging to and in addition to
the university and college sector. This terminology unit will also be
able to develop new Norwegian terminology where this is lacking. In
Termportalen professionals will be able to develop Norwegian terms,
and user groups in the various sectors of society may look up terms in
one single search field for all relevant lists and termbases. Thus,
Termportalen may become a national infrastructure to ensure the
further development of Norwegian LSP (language for specific purposes)
and terminology. Both the Language Council of Norway and the language
departments in the university and university college sector have
pointed out that a further development and operation of this prototype
will be a solid contribution to strengthening Norwegian LSPs.

The Government believes that Termportalen may become an important tool
that will contribute to universities and university colleges
fulfilling their obligations subject to the Act relating to
universities and university colleges, section 1-7 and in line with the
language policies for each institution. Additionally, Termportalen
will contribute to the overall goal in the :AppLinkContent{to="https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumenter/prop.-108-l-20192020/id2701451/"
desc="Prop. 108 L (2019–2020) Lov om språk"} [language act] to secure
Norwegian as a language that is used in all sectors of the Norwegian
society. (p 72, our translation)
::

The government subsequently followed up its proposition by ensuring
funding for a continued development of Termportalen. The funding was a
joint effort by the Ministry of Education and Research and the
Ministry of Culture and Equality.

The establishment of Termportalen at UiB in 2021 is a wheel coming to
full circle. From the 1980s until 1997, there was a strong
terminological environment at Norsk termbank (the Norwegian term
bank), UiB. It was at Norsk termbank the large national oil
terminology projects were carried out, as well as projects in e.g.
environmental standardisation and medical terminology and encoding.
The terminology developed in these projects was collected in the term
database NOT, which today is searchable in Termportalen.

The technical solutions developed by Norsk termbank were further
developed in the KB-N project[i] at the Norwegian School of Economics
and Business Administration (NHH). The KB-N project was funded by the
Norwegian Research Council (NFR) through its KUNSTI programme and may
be seen as a precursor of the Termportalen pilot project.

Termportalen was originally developed at NHH as a work package in
:AppLinkContent{to="https://clarin.w.uib.no/" desc="CLARINO"}, a
national project to establish a Norwegian infrastructure for language
resources and technologies funded by the NFR from 2012. Termportalen
was developed with funding from NFR and through the NHH employees’ own
efforts. In 2018, the technical operation of Termportalen was
transferred from NHH to the Norwegian Language Collections at UiB.
Along with the permanent funding from the Ministry of Education and
Research as of 2021, it was possible to start developing a
professional terminological environment at the University of Bergen
Library.

In the spring 2023, the government proposed an action plan for
Norwegian as a professional language in academia. One of several
measures in the plan is that models for terminology work collaboration
should be developed among the universities and university colleges
together with Termportalen.
